People who make it out of groups like exploitative
religious and pseudoscientific organisations
are often faced with distortions from two directions.
When they attempt to convey their experiences
of manipulation to members of their former group
their words are magically transformed
into 'I'm mad, evil and weak'.
But when they share their story
with non-members as a cautionary tale
their words are often magically transformed into
'I'm gullible, asinine and spineless'.
After a while, the apostates realise
they're in the noonesland of the unheard.
And it begins to become clear
why these groups continue to thrive —
groups with a talent for bending truth,
preaching love while denouncing
non-members as a subhuman underclass;
claiming to champion peace,
while committing acts of barbarism;
pontificating about family values while
tearing up countless homes;
promising freedom and enlightenment while
enforcing ignorance and exercising total control
I want to explore some of
the mechanics of manipulative groups,
dispatching some of the stereotypes
about the people who get recruited by them,
and reflecting on preventive measures
we might take to avoid recruitment.
But if there's just one thing
I really want to do in this video,
it's to communicate the importance of
acknowledging a simple but profound fact:
we can be manipulated
At a press conference on manipulative groups
Ian reveals he lost tens of thousands of dollars
When he was recruited by a group who proposed that
clusters of alien spirits are attached
to all humans, keeping us from a full potential.
Ian tells us how he and the other group members
paid through the nose — and every other orifice —
for a special kind of counselling which they
were told would rid them of these spirits.
They were told that once these spirits were gone,
they would be the primary causal agents of their lives
with skills such as telekinesis, total recall
and mastery over illness.
No evidence was given for any of this.
The alien story was the unsubstantiated
revelation claim of the group's founder
and no records have ever been
produced of a single person
gaining any of the special powers
or knowledge described.
What do we think of Ian?
Does he lack intelligence?
No. His intelligence is above average.
He's a highly creative, resourceful man —that's why
the group considered him such a juicy prospect.
Is he a bit credulous —
quick to accept whatever he's told?
No. In fact, by default, he's a cautious skeptical fellow.
Is he driven by narcissism,
desiring supremacy over others?
No. He's always been compelled
by deeply humanitarian instincts.
Of course there are folks out there who are ....
gullible, obtuse, submissive,
power-hungry, escapist, lazy.
But it's a huge mistake to assume that
successful recruitment into manipulative groups
depends on the presence of these kinds of traits.
And while we're hunting for them in Ian's case,
we're missing six crucial words:
'he was recruited by a group'.
He was subjected to a process.
The idea of alien spirit clusters wasn't presented
to him in the bald way he presented it to us.
Ian was carefully steered
through a sequence of experiences
so that by the time the alien
spirits concept was mentioned
a range of key psychological elements had
been established
to ease its entry and help insulate it from criticism.
Later on, I'll be looking at how this was done.
Just as we can become distracted
by the red herring of personality deficiencies
we can become misled by the notion
of predisposing circumstance.
Some psychologists have generated
lists of situational factors
that can leave us vulnerable to manipulative groups.
Factors like 'weak family bonds'
or 'recent bereavement'.
Problem is, when we don't find
ourselves reflected in those items,
we can be left with the impression we're not vulnerable.
When we see an item like 'weak family bonds'
we might satisfy ourselves that we not risk
because we have strong family bonds.
But strong family bonds can put people at risk too.
Many people are recruited by relative.
And if your whole family's been indoctrinated,
you could be born into a manipulative group.
In these cases, even if you wake up
and smell the Kool Aid
strong family bonds might keep you
feeling trapped inside the group
under the threat of disconnection from your family.
Members of manipulative groups are a
diverse population
and it serves us well to think creatively
about how these groups might hook us in.
Some of us go through life convinced we
possess an almost clinical objectivity —
that, barring deliberate deceptions or the
odd quirky optical illusion,
we generally perceived reality as it actually is;
and that we make decisions on a firmly rational basis.
For over a century, social psychologists
have been ripping that fantasy apart,
conducting experiments that elicit the most bizarre,
counterintuitive human responses
and exposing a gamut of distinct biases
each of which distorts our perception
in its own specific way.
A landmark concept in social psychology
emerged in the 1950s
that provided a framework on which to untangle
all kinds of paradoxical human behaviour.
Leon Festinger's theory of cognitive dissonance.
It also described arguably the biggest implement
in the toolboxes of manipulative groups
who not only rely on it to keep
existing members under their influence
but also actively exploit it to recruit new members.
Festinger and his colleagues proposed that
we seek consistency within our cognitions —
our thoughts, emotions, memories, perceptions —
and that when we discover an inconsistency
we experience a psychological discomfort
that motivates us to try and reduce that conflict.
So, what does dissonance look like in action?
Say we've been told to believe
all members of group A evil.
One day, a friend we've always known to be
a good person reveals she's a member of group A.
This arouses dissonance because
our experience contradicts our belief.
We can reduce this dissonance in a number of ways.
If we're not hugely invested in the belief,
we might opt for method one:
simply adjust our belief.
We might, for instance, change it to:
'not all members of group A are evil'.
If we're equally invested
in the belief and the friendship
we might try to preserve both using method two: denial.
We might refuse to believe
our friend is a true member of group A,
granting her special exemption
because she's just not like those other folks.
If we're more invested in the belief than
the friendship, we might go for method three:
select confirming information.
Here, we cherry-pick information consistent with
our belief and ignore information that contradicts it.
Any flaws in our friend's behaviour
or attitudes can be turned against her
while her goodness is ignored.
Festinger and his colleagues noted
that when we experience dissonance
we'll tend to avoid information or situations
that threaten further dissonance.
For instance, if we've denied that
our friend is a member of group A,
we'll want to avoid the subject in future conversations.
Or, if we've used selective information
to cast our friend as evil,
we might quickly break off contact to avoid
giving her the chance to reason with us.
But sometimes our response to dissonance
is so horrendously distorted
that it makes us almost
invulnerable to further dissonance,
reducing our need for avoidance.
For example, say we look for evidence
that our friend's evil, but can't find any?
What if — time after time — we're confronted with good?
How can we possibly preserve a belief
that all members of group A are evil now?
Well, all is not as bleak as it seems.
We have method four: repackaging.
Believing that no member of
group A could possibly be good
We could repackage our experience
of our friend's goodness as something it's not.
We might tell ourselves she was only pretending
to be good — it was all an act, a deception.
And isn't that the most insidious evil of all?
The evil that disguises itself as good?
The wolf in sheep's clothing?
We've now put our friend in a no-win position.
Even her goodness has now
become evidence of her evil.
Now we don't even have to avoid her.
Anything she does — good or bad — confirms our belief.
Later on, I'll be looking at how manipulative groups
explicitly employ these kinds of extreme contortions
to put their critics in a no-win position
and keep their members under psychological lockdown.
Various experiments have shown how dissonance
can be actively exploited to induce positive responses.
In a 1959 paper
Aronson and Mills investigated the role of initiation
procedures in attitudes toward groups.
They advertised for female subjects to join
a group discussing the psychology of sex.
But before being accepted, subjects were told
they had to pass an embarrassment test.
There were three experimental conditions.
Subjects in the 'severe initiation' condition
read out loud to the experimenter
a list of words considered obscene
as well as sexually explicit passages.
Subjects in the 'mild initiation' condition read out loud a list of sexual but non-obscene terms.
Subjects in the 'no initiation' condition weren't screened.
Each subject then listened to the same pre-recorded
discussion,deliberately designed to be boring.
They then rated their perceptions of the group.
Intuitively, one might think the more severe the initiation
the more the discussion's
dreariness would be accentuated.
But the reverse was true.
Subjects from the 'severe' condition showed
the strongest liking for the group,
rating it as significantly more attractive
compared with the ratings of the other groups.
Aronson and Mills explained this counter-intuitive finding in terms of dissonance between two cognitions:
subjects in the 'severe' condition had gone through a difficult experience to join the group,
but the group wasn't worthwhile.
When we invest time, effort, money,
emotion, in an enterprise
we want to believe our investment isn't wasted.
So we repackage useless enterprises as useful.
This result, supported by other studies,
demonstrates how worthless groups
can be made to appear worthwhile.
A decade later, Knox and Inkster showed
just how quickly actions can induce attitudes.
At a racetrack, 69 bettors were asked
by one experimenter, just prior to betting
to rate the chances of their horse winning.
72 bettors were asked by a second
experimenter, just after placing their bets.
Using a 7-point scale, on average,
pre-bettors rated their chances 'fair'.
Post-bettors rated their chances 'good'.
One bettor, who'd given a rating
to the pre-bet experimenter and placed his bet
then spotted the post-bet experimenter
and asked if the two were working together.
He then enquired if he could now
change his rating from 'fair' to 'excellent'.
Studies like this show the important
role behaviour plays in dissonance.
In fact, when we're looking at the
components of dissonance
we could divide them into three broad classes:
behaviour, emotions and thoughts.
Pull hard enough on one and, in our drive
for consistency, the others will follow
When we behave as if we're committed,
our thoughts and emotions often fall in line.
But how do we become
so heavily invested in an idea
that we find ourselves twisting
concepts into their opposites —
bending 'good' into 'evil', 'love' into 'hate' —
just to preserve that idea?
While cognitive dissonance studies tend
to focus on the conflict between two ideas
those two ideas don't of course exist in isolation.
Networks of reinforcing ideas often lie behind them.
For instance, regarding our
hypothetical belief that group A is evil
maybe our entire community has
always vehemently condemned group A.
We might have behaved hatefully toward some
members of group A ourselves in the past
based solely on this prejudice.
We might also have seen group A sympathisers
being attacked and ostracised.
If it turns out group A isn't evil,
we have some tough realities to face.
First, we have to admit
our entire community is wrong.
This could tap into some hefty issues
around trust, loyalty and credibility.
Second, we'll have to admit our own
hateful behaviour was unjustified.
This could have big implications for our self-image.
Third, we now face being attacked
and ostracised if we defend groups A
which taps into our ideas of safety and security.
These tough realities might
feel intensely threatening to us.
But the threat goes away if we can find some way
of preserving our belief that group A is evil.
So it is that we might find ourselves turning on
our friend just to preserve a false belief.
And of course this might in itself make it even harder
to admit our mistake in the future
because adding to all the other tough realities
we'll now have to admit we betrayed a good friend.
Our minds are not objective, logical machines.
Our minds are vast networks of ideas,
striving not necessarily for truth
but for internal consistency.
In view of this, it's plain to see why childhood
is by far the most preferred period
for indoctrination into manipulative groups.
Parents and guardians can
get in there right at the start
and insert any unsubstantiated concept they like
into the child's basic
initial framework without resistance.
Being implanted so early
they stand a good chance of becoming core beliefs
with rich networks of ideas reinforcing them including
strong associations of identity of many levels —
individual, family, culture, perhaps nationality.
If the unsubstantiated concept is later challenged,
threatening tremors could be felt in all of these areas.
Indoctrinating adults who've already developed
an advanced cognitive network isn't so straightforward.
Manipulative groups often have to
insert their unsubstantiated ideas
into a distinctly inhospitable environment.
And it's no coincidence that in order to achieve that goal
some groups will try to mimic those
childhood conditions by infantilising adults.
When I was a christian we were repeatedly told
that we needed to be like children —
trusting and dependent on Yahweh
which in the total absence of any evidence of Yahweh
translates to: 'trusting and dependent on
the humans who claim to represent Yahweh'.
And there was a nice little threat
thrown in there.
If you didn't become like children,
you'd never get into heaven.
In a similar vein we were told:
'Lean not on your own understanding'.
'Do not be wise in your own eyes'.
The message in all these
commands couldn't be clearer.
Wherever your ideas conflict with those of the group,
it's your ideas that need to change.
Folks who submit to these commands can now have vast amounts of their cognitive network rewritten
without substantial resistance — just like childhood.
Of course, adult recruits are more of a bonus
than a necessity for the major world religions
who are guaranteed a steady influx of child recruits
As long as the abuse of childhood
religious indoctrination continues.
Other groups who are more reliant on adult recruits
often have to manipulate cognitive
dissonance in more subtle ways.
Let's go back to Ian and see how he gets recruited
by a group claiming clusters of
alien spirits are attached to us all
keeping us from a full potential.
Ian is approached on the street
by a woman with a personality questionnaire.
He agrees to accompany her inside
the official premises behind her
where he spends half an hour completing it.
His results show him to be
unstable, depressed, nervous and overly critical.
These conflict with his self-image.
But the woman talks with him for a further half hour about his life — his frustrations, his disappointments —
and draws tentative connections with his results.
She says her group runs courses that can
help him become a more effective person.
Ian's natural caution stops him
from signing up for a course
but he agrees to buy a cheap book.
He now experiences his first cognitive
dissonance in the group's favour.
He has two conflicting cognitions:
one, that he's not interested;
but two, that he's just invested an hour
of his time and bought a book.
Dissonance leads him to adjust his first cognition
and rationalise that he is interested.
Going home, he dips into the book and reflects on
the idea of becoming a more effective person.
The questionnaire results begin to play on his mind.
Despite himself, he begins
to select confirming information
finding memories that match the results.
Deciding he has nothing to lose by
giving it a go, he returns
and signs up for a course on communication.
Ian is now locked into a commitment cycle.
The more time and money he invests,
the more he becomes convinced it's worthwhile
The easier he's persuaded to invest
more time and money in further courses.
The courses include odd activities like
sitting in silence, staring at another member
or endlessly picking up the same object.
These meaningless tasks confuse Ian
And induce trance states and hallucinations
increasing his susceptibility to direction.
At the end of each course Ian has to
write up and read out loud to the group
how the course helped him.
This forces him not only to find meaning
in the meaningless tasks
but to declare it publicly.
Declaring benefits he doesn't
really feel creates dissonance
which Ian reduces by rationalising
that he does feel benefits.
His dissonance is further reduced in two ways.
First, Ian's speech receives huge praise
and applause from other members
validating his words and building on his feelings
of acceptance and loyalty to the group.
Second, the testimony of other members further
justifies the idea that the tasks have meaning.
Other activities train Ian not
to react to provocation.
For instance, when being goaded with
insults and jokes by other members.
Ian learns to disconnect from confrontation.
He rationalises that this training
is helping him focus.
It'll soon be put to other uses.
Ian's told of the group's interest
in the betterment of humankind.
Their aim is 'total freedom for everyone on the planet'.
This resonates powerfully with
his own humanitarian concerns.
But he's told about critics who want
to sabotage this important work,
spreading lies and alienating members.
The group encourages Ian to avoid
mainstream media for this reason.
He's always been against
censorship.
But censorship has now been repackaged as
a sensible precaution against destructive critics.
Thee group now controls
all information about the group.
When later confronted by critics in person
Ian automatically disconnects
from them, as he's been trained to do
blocking out the very folks who could help him.
In everyday life, Ian feels better, sharper, more confident
more effective.
But it's an illusion.
With the group's courses pitched at kindergarten levels,
in developmental terms, far from being stretched
Ian's been slowly regressing.
After completing the basic courses
Ian's processed straight into the next level.
A strange over-ritualised kind
of counseling is introduced
using lie-detector like technology
to gauge his emotional reaction as he
repeatedly confronts difficult memories.
The aim is to nullify all emotional
reaction to past traumas
until it no longer registers on the apparatus.
These counselling sessions are expensive.
Sometimes very tiring. But he
frequently emerges feeling lighter.
The sessions take him further and further into the past
until he's not quite sure if he's
dealing with real memories.
Ian visits his parents. He talks about the group.
His father is concerned about
the money Ian's getting through
and does an internet search on the group.
He's disturbed at what he reads
and asked Ian to take a look
but Ian declines, saying it's all lies.
When he tells the group about
his parents' reaction.
Ian finds himself being interviewed at length
with concerns expressed about how
their influence could seriously damage his progress.
At the end of an exhausting session
Ian agrees to only discuss
superficial subjects with his parents.
He takes the issue to counselling
to nullify his emotional reaction.
The groups' noble aim of total freedom for
everyone on the planet has been repackaged.
'Total freedom' now means:
'freedom to do what the group allows'.
'Everyone on the planet' now means 'everyone who remains uncritical of the group'.
Three years and thousands of dollars later
Ian's completed two levels of counseling.
He's also expecting his second child
with his new wife, also a member of the group.
Time for level three.
He's led into a room and shown a document
that tells him the following information:
Millions of years ago, an evil galactic ruler
transported billions of aliens to earth in spaceplanes
placed them around volcanoes
and blew them up with nuclear weapons.
As they departed from their bodies,
the alien spirits were then captured in electronic traps
and subjected to a month-long 3d propaganda movie
that implanted false ideas in them
including the world religions.
These alien spirits roamed the earth
aimlessly and when humans evolved
they attached themselves in clusters to their bodies.
These alien spirits are what keep humans
from fulfilling their full potential.
Ian now experiences perhaps the most
violent dissonance in his life.
If he rejects the alien story, he's out.
And all the time, energy and money
he's invested in the group has been wasted.
The group's strict policy of shunning dissenters
also means the loss of his wife,
his children and all his friends.
But beyond even these threatening realities
is a deep-seated belief that will
keep him under the group's influence
haemorrhaging money for another two years:
'I could never be manipulated'.
To him, the only folks who fall for cons
are gullible, acquiescent, stupid.
And that's just not him.
And indeed that wasn't him
Nonetheless he was recruited.
Not because of some personality deficiency.
But simply because he's a human being
who — like all of us — possesses a brain
that's evolved to strive towards consistency.
In his extreme state of dissonance
Ian is led directly into a counselling session
to nullify his emotional reaction.
A few years ago, a woman wrote to me to tell me
she'd once thought I used demonic
psychological techniques in my videos.
She'd been in a very controlling
fundamentalist religious group at the time
and was disturbed to find herself feeling persuaded by some of the atheist counter-arguments I was presenting.
She was convinced I'd used satanic mind control
to put her under a spell.
This was no random rationalisation. Her group had told her this was how the atheists got you.
And she was terrified it had happened to her.
To try and break the spell
she watched the same videos over and over
to figure out exactly how I'd corrupted her.
It was during this process of analysis that she
came to realise the simpler explanation:
she'd been persuaded by legitimate counter-arguments.
She then realised something else:
she'd become an atheist.
This woman's story is an illustration of how manipulative groups develop strategies
to put critics in no-win situations.
If I fail to persuade, I lose.
If I succeed in persuading,
I must be cheating, therefore I lose.
Manipulative groups often possess a
wealth of ready-made rationalisations
deviously designed so that their members'
cognitive dissonance is resolved in the group's favour.
Some of them involve splitting
a single concept into two categories.
We saw this with our hypothetical
friend from evil group A
whose goodness was invalidated by
repackaging it as a deception.
Whatever good she did only proved her deceitfulness.
Here, goodness was effectively split into
true goodness and false goodness.
Group A's goodness was always false.
The authors of the Bible perform
a similar split in regard to wisdom
dividing it into true godly wisdom and
false worldly wisdom.
Worldly wisdom, which employs
human philosophy reason and logic,
is dismissed in various books
including Proverbs and Romans.
But 1 Corinthians goes further.
In chapter 1, we're told that godly wisdom
appears foolish to the worldly wise;
that Yahweh has deliberately chosen foolish means
by which to confound the worldly wise
turning the worldly wise into fools.
This repackaging of wisdom allows the group
to rebuff all criticisms out of hand.
Of course the critics think their religion
is foolish!
Their God deliberately made their beliefs
incomprehensible to the worldly wise!
Manipulative groups sometimes try to shield themselves from their critics by keeping their beliefs secret.
Some groups suggest their beliefs are so potent
they could strike down or even kill the uninitiated.
When he was recruited into the Unification Church,
otherwise known as the Moonies,
Steven Hassan, a leading writer, speaker and
counsellor in the field of manipulative groups.
was told: 'You wouldn't feed a baby
thick pieces of steak would you? ....
.... You have to feed a baby something
it can digest, like formula ....
.... Well these people are spiritual babies.
Don't tell them more than they can handle ....
.... or they'll die.'
Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, founder of
pseudoscientific dianetics and scientology
suggested that if folks were told about
Scientology's Xenu (Xemu) creation myth
without appropriate preparation,
they might develop pneumonia.
The Xenu story has become pretty common knowledge due to countless testimonies from ex-scientologists.
But a global Xenu-induced pneumonia
epidemic has yet to be reported.
Some groups claim it's pointless
to try and explain beliefs
that are too advanced for non-members to comprehend.
Heaven's Gate was a UFO religious group
who committed mass suicide by ingesting
phenobarbital mixed into apple sauce
believing this would allow their souls
to be picked up on a spacecraft
trailing the Hale-Bopp comet.
In a testimony video recorded shortly before their deaths
one member used the analogy of a person
on a doctoral degree in quantum mechanics
trying to explain to a second grader what he's learned.
Another favourite manoeuvre used
by manipulative groups to deflect criticism
is to develop a persecution narrative.
Here, rather than splitting a single concept into two,
the group will instead join distinct concepts into one.
Persecution is about the systemic
mistreatment of an individual or group.
It's about cruel and unfair behaviour.
Where a group is angrily criticised and condemned
for social legal and/or ethical violations
that's not persecution. That's protest.
Government officials jailed for criminally denying
the rights of people they personally deem unworthy
are not being persecuted for their religious beliefs.
Parents jailed for letting children die
by denying them vital medical assistance.
are not being persecuted for their religious beliefs.
They're being punished for their own cruel and
unfair behaviour towards their fellow humans.
By repackaging appropriate protest
and punishment as persecution
not only do manipulative groups
get to commit all kinds of abuses guilt-free.
they get to feel like martyrs while they're doing it.
Consoling them further are passages
from their holy books
that promise great rewards for being persecuted
— after they die of course.
It's been put to me more than once
that critics don't stand a chance against
belief systems that are so psychologically ring-fenced
and can wield such gargantuan carrots and sticks.
And yet critics to get through.
Though the odds are stacked in the group's favour
dissonance isn't guaranteed to go their way.
Time after time, something sticks.
A phrase.
An image.
An argument.
A question.
That tiny fragment of clarity is sometimes all it takes
to instigate a process of self-extraction.
So critics take heart — and speak out.
Our minds are vast networks of ideas,
striving not necessarily for truth
but for internal consistency
so that that the injection of a false idea into
that network can have a domino effect
distorting the ideas around it.
From this, three things become clear.
One, the importance of anchoring our beliefs
in firm evidence and valid, sound logic.
The more we lower these standards,
the easier false ideas slip inside.
Two, the importance of getting
comfortable with not knowing.
If we don't know whether an assertion is true or false
we need to be real about that.
Taking the dishonest position of 'I know'
based on what we want to believe
could lead to false rationalisations
if future evidence contradicts us.
Taking be honest position of 'I don't know'
mean future evidence can be assessed openly
Three, the importance of understanding
the techniques of manipulative groups.
These groups are practiced at insinuating
false ideas into our cognitive networks
gradually turning our worlds upside down
so that while we think we're still grounded in reality
we've instead hooked ourselves to clouds.
and we're drifting slowly away
from all sense and reason.
One of the best preventative
measures against recruitment?
Learn about recruitment techniques.
One of the best ways of doing that?
Listen to the stories of the people who've been there.
Manipulative groups are often made
of folks just like you and me.
That's what makes them so effective —
because the folks who recruit us are just like us.
Another preventive measure is to disarm the beliefs
that can be used against us to induce dissonance.
As Aronson and Mills showed
we're sometimes fooled into thinking that groups
who get us to jump through hoops are worthwhile
because we want to believe our time isn't wasted.
That phrase 'want to believe' is like
a signpost, saying: 'Examine me!'
Is this belief justified or is it a wishful distortion?
The fact is our time is sometimes
wasted by undeserving pursuits.
When we acknowledge that,
this particular manipulation is disarmed.
And we can apply the same principle
to many other ideas we want to believe
that can be used against us.
For instance, that we're always right
or that we can always judge a person's character.
I'm sure you can think of other examples.
I'll end on one: wanting to believe
we can't be manipulated.
Of course we're manipulated all the time.
Manipulated by adverts to buy products.
Manipulated by loved ones to do favours.
But if we ever have the misfortune
of getting recruited by a manipulative group
this wishful distortion could block all our escape routes,
keeping us in a state of denial.
Seems paradoxical, but the moment
we admit we can be manipulated
We instantly reduce our chances of being manipulated
because we become more open
to evidence that we have been.
Chances are some folks watching this
are in a manipulative group right now
excusing their group's abuses and hypocrisies.
The more aware we are of their methods
and of our own human quirks and biases
the less successful they'll be in
keeping us doing what keeps them alive:
bending truth.